Working Group Proposal for Reference Types (#335)
opencontainers/distribution-spec: client-implementation.md

# Client Implementations

> This document describes client implementation recommendations for interoperability with registry servers and other clients using the OCI Distribution Spec.

Reviewer: The "other clients" comment comes from referrers fallback to a tag, since it involves multiple client tools modifying the same manifest that is referenced by a single tag. E.g. if the image signing tool assumes it's the only tool pushing artifacts and it overwrites the current tag, that would effectively delete the SBOM and other artifacts associated with the image.

## Backwards Compatibility

> Client implementations SHOULD support registries that implement partial or older versions of the OCI Distribution Spec.

Reviewer: New clients using distribution-spec 1.1 SHOULD support a registry that only provides distribution-spec 1.0. But if someone makes a client that requires 1.1 APIs, I don't think we can stop them.

> Client implementations SHOULD support registries that implement partial or older versions of the OCI Distribution Spec.

Reviewer 2: See "MUST fallback" language below.

In general I think we should shy away from language in a child document that redefines language in the parent document (spec.md).

> This section describes how client fallback procedures when an API is not available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Client fallback procedures are provided below for cases when a new/optional API is not available from a Registry.
```

### Referrers API

> The Referrers API here is described by [Listing Referrers](spec.md#listing-referrers) and [end-12](spec.md#endpoints).

Reviewer 3: "Referrers" needs to be explained before this sentence.
Should be also noted that this has nothing to do with HTTP Referers

Reviewer 3: And "Referrers" vs "Refers" ?

Reviewer 2: There are a few places where the Refers field (schema) and Referrers API are used interchangeably.

Reviewer: Referrers and Refers have been added to the Definitions

> The Referrers API here is described by [Listing Referrers](spec.md#listing-referrers) and [end-12a](spec.md#endpoints).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Referrers API is described in these sections  [Listing Referrers](spec.md#listing-referrers) and [end-12a](spec.md#endpoints) of the [Open Container Initiative Distribution Specification](spec.md#open-container-initiative-distribution-specification).
```

> A client that pushes an Image or Artifact manifest with a defined `Refers` field MUST verify the Referrers API is available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before pushing an Image or Artifact manifest with a defined `Refers` field a client MUST first verify the Referrers API is available.
```

Reviewer 2: ** how will they do that? is there a known nil/empty set request?

Reviewer: After the artifact is pushed, there will be content in the API. Before that, there would be an Index with an empty manifest list.

Reviewer 2: ok, I've now skimmed both of the spec change PRs.. :-)

I believe when you say there would be an index with an empty manifest list you are specifically talking about the image.index that is used for "information about a set of images that can span a variety of architectures and operating systems" (where each image is defined by an image manifest) for which it seems this new proposal is now also using for the new artifact manifest. Is there some expression here that is switching to using a more generalized term "index" when referring to the image.index which is now for image manifests and/or artifact manifests?   

If so let's make sure that's described somewhere, then make sure to go through all the existing image index terms and see where it needs to be index.

Reviewer: > Before pushing an Image or Artifact manifest with a defined `Refers` field a client MUST first verify the Referrers API is available.

I don't believe order is important, you can push the manifest and then afterwords verify that the Referrers API is available. In fact to push the change to the tag schema Index, you would need to first push the manifest so the Index contains valid descriptors.

"index with an empty manifest list" is the response from the Referrers API when the API exists but no manifest with a matching refers field is found.

> I believe ... you are specifically talking about the image.index that is used for "information about a set of images that can span a variety of architectures and operating systems"

It's a reference to https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/image-index.md. Each descriptor in there points to a manifest, which isn't limited to an image manifest in the spec today. We can update the image-spec to clarify that the Index MUST support the new Artifact manifest as a descriptor.

Reviewer 2: kk 

interesting, the overloading of the image.index manifest schema for the referrers api, .. need to think it over, what needs to be said about it in the spec wrt client use of a partial index etc.

yes (IMO) to the make sure the image spec (image.index) includes MUST language for supporting artifact manifest type.. (for the next version)

> A client querying the Referrers API and receiving a 404 MUST fallback to using an Index pushed to a tag described by the following schema.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The client having queried the Registry for existence of the Referrers API and receiving a 404 MUST fallback to using a pattern for updating manifests with a Refers Tag as described below.
```

#### Referrers Tag Schema

```text
<alg>-<ref>
```

- `<alg>`: the digest algorithm (e.g. `sha256` or `sha512`)
- `<ref>`: the digest from the `refers` field (limit of 64 characters)

For example, a manifest with the `Refers` field digest set to `sha256:aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa` in the `registry.example.org/project` repository would have a expect an Index at `registry.example.org/project:sha256-aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa`

#### Pushing Manifests with Refers

> When pushing an Image or Artifact manifest with the `Refers` field and the Referrers API returns a 404, the client MUST:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When pushing a manifest with a `Refers` field and the Referrers API is not present in the Registry (has returned a 404 on use of the `GET` Referrers endpoint), the client MUST:
```

Reviewer: Setting the `Refers` field on an Index manifest is not supported (it could result in loops in the DAG that we want to avoid). So the "Image or Artifact manifest" language here is important.

Reviewer 2: nod.. language could include or say manifest of type image/artifact.. note: a refers field was not added to image.index and will not to avoid loops in the directed graph of an image and artifact parts..

> 1. Pull the Index using the tag schema.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Pull the manifest using the digest from the Refers field.
```

Reviewer: This isn't pulling the target manifest. It's pulling an Index of referrers to the target manifest.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Pull the Image Index using the referrers tag schema.
```

Reviewer 2: for what it's worth the image index is described as a higher level manifest.. In other portions of this spec we've tried to use the more generic manifest term if and when it did make sense. I see now that this probably doesn't make sense in this case :-)

> 1. If the tag returns a manifest other than the expected Index, the client SHOULD report a failure and skip the remaining steps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. If the pull manifest by digest returns a manifest other than the expected manifest, the client SHOULD report a failure and skip the remaining steps.
```

Reviewer 2: similar changes below...

Reviewer: The pull in this case is for a tag, not a digest. The tag schema just happens to contain the digest of a different manifest.

Reviewer 2: yeah sort of confused here given we just defined referrers tag schema.. then proceed to provide a push manifest example (image or artifact) and now we are pulling the index using the tag schema.. I read it as meaning the referrers tag schema)  

hard to tell in this example if there is an image.index to pull yet by tag and if there is one what does that index have to do with the image/arfifact manifest we are pushing as that would be a different image.index? 

maybe more examples, or more explanation?

Reviewer: The phrasing has been changed to say "Referrer list" rather than "Index" to hopefully make this one clearer.
